A major theme that runs throughout Steyerl’s essay is that of surveillance. In your own words, define surveillance and discuss how the notion of a “vertical” or aerial perspective lends itself to a culture of surveillance according to Steyerl’s thought experiment.


The word surveillance can have a variety of meanings. Initially, I thought of cheesy spy movies, then thought about how surveillance could impact my daily life. Walking into public areas where there is always a fixed security camera watching the public’s movements, used to capture evidence for any suspicious behaviour, for example. Being active on any search engine and as soon as I click on a link, I am followed up with “this website uses cookies,” and feel an urge that my online patterns are being inspected. In this modern age, I would define surveillance as “sophisticated stalking,” as the public turns a blind eye or is unaware of someone or something overseeing and tracking our interactions for an intended purpose. 


The notion of an aerial perspective lends itself to a culture of surveillance according to Steyerl’s thought experiment because, as he mentioned, “your sense of orientation may be distorted and is playing mind games on you,” and the idea of needing to stay grounded (“In Free Fall”). Steyerl touches upon applications like Google Maps that portray computerized aerial views and how they lose touch with linear perspective. I can recall a moment when my brother has been able to spot himself on Google Maps and that the image will always be in their archive. The thought of the words “surveillance culture” is so vague and bone-chilling. To think that monitoring scenarios like a satellite capturing images can invade someone’s privacy or develop into an obsessive activity. 


Works Cited:
“In Free Fall: A Thought Experiment on Vertical Perspective - Journal #24 April 2011 - e-Flux.” E-Flux Journal, www.e-flux.com/journal/24/67860/in-free-fall-a-thought-experiment-on-vertical-perspective.