1. A key part to generative design and code is pattern and routine. Akin to a chess player, marking each move down, and keeping a trace of your decisions can prove useful for your own process and future making. As a designer, to know that there might be a variety of possibilities to a given situation, can aid our ways of observing by using tools in novel ways. In one series of work, Van Rossum looks to the fundamentals of waveforms as a departure point and reference point for connecting an interface to affecting the parameters of a letterform. If the letters explode, so too would the speakers. Find 1 unique example of a pattern in nature that appears to be programmatic. Post a visual of this pattern and describe how it is programmatic in nature.


A unique example of a pattern in nature that appears to be programmatic is an endless field of rice paddies found in Ubud, Indonesia, titled Aerial View of rice Paddy by photographer Joel Vodell. There happens to be an abundant amount of “rect” and “square” forms that somewhat mimicked a “tessellation-like” pattern. Tessellation patterns are composed of a pattern of 2D shapes that seamlessly link up equally creating balance and symmetry in the pattern. However, the curved routes and unequal forms add an organic, distorted essence only found in nature. It is programmatic in nature as it reminded me of what Just van Rossum described in his lecture about Voronoi tessellation patterns “there is a bunch of points scattered randomly on the pad and the lines are drawn within each “tile” is mathematically/programmatically divided to be are closest to the original point and cannot be closer to any other point” (“Math, Logic, Design?” 50:54-51:32). The Voronoi tessellation pattern shown in van Rossum’s lecture consists of many small "quad" forms that feature both uneven curved and straight lines, creating a complex yet beautifully organic structure. Looking at the Voronoi tessellation pattern and the rice paddies image I did have an initial correlating thought that both reminded me of mosaic tile art with the lines mimicking the grout. I remember making a mosaic art piece in elementary school and being told of the beauty of imperfect tiles and the charm of recycling old tiles/materials into an artwork. That is why Vodell’s image struck me with the vibrant colour and natural forms. 


Works Cited
“Math, Logic, Design? with Just van Rossum.” YouTube, uploaded by The Cooper Union, 21 Nov. 2017, www.youtube.com/watch?v=O5ATijqPdXQ&feature=youtu.be.


Vodell, Joel. “Aerial View of Rice Paddy.” Unsplash, 20 Feb. 2018, unsplash.com/photos/ehQNfr7odvs.